---
layout: post
title:  "Suricata: Working with IDS/IPS"
date: 2025-03-9
author: C. Casquatch
comments: false
tag: ['ids', 'ips', 'suricata', 'htb']
---

Regarded as a potent instrument for Network Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), and Network Security Monitoring (NSM), Suricata represents a cornerstone of network security. This open-source powerhouse, managed and developed by the Open Information Security Foundation (OISF), is a testament to the strength of a community-led, non-profit initiative.

The objective of Suricata is to dissect every iota of network traffic, seeking potential signs of malicious activities. Its strength lies in the ability to not only conduct a sweeping evaluation of our network's condition but also delve into the details of individual application-layer transactions. The key to Suricata's successful operation lies in an intricately designed set of rules. These guidelines direct Suricata's analysis process, identifying potential threats and areas of interest. Equipped to perform at high velocities on both off-the-shelf and specifically designed hardware, Suricata's efficiency is second to none.

Suricata Operation Modes
------------------------

Suricata operates in four (4) distinct modes:

1.  **The Intrusion Detection System (IDS) mode** positions Suricata as a silent observer. In this capacity, Suricata meticulously examines traffic, flagging potential attacks but refraining from any form of intervention. By providing an in-depth view of network activities and accelerating response times, this mode augments network visibility, albeit without offering direct protection.
2.  **In the Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) mode**, Suricata adopts a proactive stance. All network traffic must pass through Suricata's stringent checks and is only granted access to the internal network upon Suricata's approval. This mode bolsters security by proactively thwarting attacks before they penetrate our internal network. Deploying Suricata in IPS mode demands an intimate understanding of the network landscape to prevent the inadvertent blocking of legitimate traffic. Furthermore, each rule activation necessitates rigorous testing and validation. While this mode enhances security, the inspection process may introduce latency.
3.  **The Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDPS) mode** brings together the best of both IDS and IPS. While Suricata continues to passively monitor traffic, it possesses the ability to actively transmit RST packets in response to abnormal activities. This mode strikes a balance between active protection and maintaining low latency, crucial for seamless network operations.
4.  **In its Network Security Monitoring (NSM) mode**, Suricata transitions into a dedicated logging mechanism, eschewing active or passive traffic analysis or prevention capabilities. It meticulously logs every piece of network information it encounters, providing a valuable wealth of data for retrospective security incident investigations, despite the high volume of data generated.

Suricata Inputs
---------------

Regarding Suricata inputs, there are two main categories:

1.  **Offline Input:** This involves reading PCAP files for processing previously captured packets in the LibPCAP file format. It is not only advantageous for conducting post-mortem data examination but also instrumental when experimenting with various rule sets and configurations.
2.  **Live Input:** Live input can be facilitated via LibPCAP, where packets are read directly from network interfaces. However, LibPCAP is somewhat hamstrung by its performance limitations and lack of load-balancing capabilities. For inline operations, NFQ and AF\_PACKET options are available. NFQ, a Linux-specific inline IPS mode, collaborates with IPTables to divert packets from the kernel space into Suricata for detailed scrutiny. Commonly used inline, NFQ necessitates drop rules for Suricata to effectively obstruct packets. Conversely, AF\_PACKET provides a performance improvement over LibPCAP and supports multi-threading. Nevertheless, it's not compatible with older Linux distributions and can't be employed inline if the machine is also tasked with routing packets.

Please note that there are other, less commonly used or more advanced inputs available.

Suricata Outputs
----------------

Suricata creates multiple outputs, including logs, alerts, and additional network-related data such as DNS requests and network flows. One of the most critical outputs is EVE, a JSON formatted log that records a wide range of event types including alerts, HTTP, DNS, TLS metadata, drop, SMTP metadata, flow, netflow, and more. Tools such as [Logstash](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/logstash/current/index.html) can easily consume this output, facilitating data analysis.

We might encounter Unified2 Suricata output, which is essentially a Snort binary alert format, enabling integration with other software that leverages Unified2. Any Unified2 output can be read using Snort’s [u2spewfoo](https://github.com/snort3/snort3/blob/main/snort3/src/decoder/unified2/u2spewfoo.c) tool, which is a straightforward and effective method to gain insight into the alert data.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the commands covered from this point up to the end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.

Configuring Suricata & Custom Rules
-----------------------------------

Once we've accessed the deployed Suricata instance over SSH, we can get an overview of all the rule files with a simple execution command.

ls -lah /etc/suricata/rules/

The rules can be seen in a straightforward list format and be inspected to understand their functionality, as follows:

more /etc/suricata/rules/emerging-malware.rules

Rules might be commented out, meaning they aren't loaded and don't affect the system. This usually happens when a new version of the rule comes into play or if the threat associated with the rule becomes outdated or irrelevant.

Each rule usually involves specific variables, such as `$HOME_NET` and `$EXTERNAL_NET`. The rule examines traffic from the IP addresses specified in the `$HOME_NET` variable heading towards the IP addresses in the `$EXTERNAL_NET` variable.

These variables can be defined in the `suricata.yaml` configuration file.

more /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml

This allows us to customise these variables according to our specific network environment and even define our own variables.

Finally, to configure Suricata to load signatures from a custom rules file, such as `local.rules` in the `/home/htb-student` directory, we would execute the below.

sudo vim /etc/suricata/suricata.yaml

*   Add `/home/htb-student/local.rules` to rule-files:
*   Press the Esc key
*   Enter `:wq` and then, press the Enter key

The `local.rules` file that resides in the `/home/htb-student` directory of this section's target already contains a Suricata rule. This rule is adequate for this section's learning objectives. We will elaborate more on Suricata rule development in the next section.

Hands-on With Suricata Inputs
-----------------------------

With Suricata inputs, we can experiment with both offline and live input:

1.  For offline input (reading PCAP files - suspicious.pcap in this case), the following command needs to be executed, and Suricata will create various logs (mainly eve.json, fast.log, and stats.log).

suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/suspicious.pcap

An alternative command can be executed to bypass checksums (`-k` flag) and log in a different directory (`-l` flag).

suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/suspicious.pcap -k none -l .

1.  For live input, we can try Suricata’s (Live) LibPCAP mode as follows.

ifconfig

sudo suricata --pcap=ens160 -vv

1.  For Suricata in Inline (NFQ)

### QUESTIONS

#### Filter out only HTTP events from /var/log/suricata/old_eve.json using the the jq command-line JSON processor. Enter the flow_id that you will come across as your answer.
ANSWER:

#### Enable the http-log output in suricata.yaml and run Suricata against /home/htb-student/pcaps/suspicious.pcap. Enter the requested PHP page as your answer. Answer format: _.php
ANSWER:




Suricata Rule Development Part 1
================================

At its core, Suricata rules act as instructions for the engine, directing it to actively monitor network traffic for specific indicators. When such markers are detected, an alert is triggered.

These rules are not limited to detecting malicious activity or harmful traffic. They can also be used to provide valuable insights or context about the traffic passing through the network. Whether a rule is broad or specific, striking the right balance is crucial to ensure we capture relevant indicators of compromise while avoiding false positives.

Building these rules often relies on key information from the infosec community and threat intelligence feeds. However, it’s important to note that each rule consumes some of the host’s CPU and memory. As such, Suricata provides specific recommendations for writing efficient rules.

Understanding Suricata Rule Structure
-------------------------------------

Below is an example of a Suricata rule. Let’s break it down.

        action protocol from\_ip port -> to\_ip port (msg:"Known malicious behaviour, possible X malware infection"; content:"some thing"; content:"some other thing"; sid:10000001; rev:1;)
    

*   **Header (action protocol from\_ip port -> to\_ip port):**
    
    The header defines the action Suricata should take when the rule matches, as well as the protocol and ports involved. The traffic direction is indicated by the arrow between the two IP-port pairs.
    
    *   **Action:** Specifies what action Suricata should take if the rule triggers (e.g., alert, log, pass, drop, reject).
    *   **Protocol:** This could be any of the protocols such as tcp, udp, icmp, etc.
    *   **Traffic Direction:** Suricata uses variables like $HOME\_NET and $EXTERNAL\_NET to indicate whether traffic is inbound, outbound, or bidirectional. For example:
        *   Outbound: $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET 9090
        *   Inbound: $EXTERNAL\_NET any -> $HOME\_NET 8443
        *   Bidirectional: $EXTERNAL\_NET any <> $HOME\_NET any
    *   **Port Definitions:** Define the ports the rule will evaluate. For example:
        *   alert tcp $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET 9443
        *   alert tcp $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET $UNCOMMON\_PORTS
*   **Rule Message and Content:**
    
    This section contains the message Suricata will display when the rule is triggered, along with the content to match within the traffic.
    
    *   **msg:** An arbitrary message displayed when the rule triggers. It should ideally provide details about the threat or behaviour detected.
    *   **content:** Specifies the specific content to match within the packet for detection. For example, if looking for a specific User-Agent in HTTP traffic, the content might look like:
        
        content:"User-Agent|3a 20|Go-http-client/1.1|0d 0a|Accept-Encoding|3a 20|gzip";
        
*   **Rule Metadata (sid, rev, etc.):**
    
    This section includes the signature ID (sid) and revision (rev), which help uniquely identify and track the evolution of the rule. For example:
    
    sid:10000001; rev:1;
    

Using PCRE for Advanced Rule Detection
--------------------------------------

For more complex rule crafting, Suricata supports Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE). The `pcre` keyword is used to define the regular expression, which is enclosed in forward slashes. Anchors should be placed after the slashes, and certain characters require escaping with a backslash.

However, relying solely on PCRE is not recommended, as it can be resource-intensive. Here's an example of a rule using PCRE:

        alert http any any -> $HOME\_NET any (msg: "ATTACK \[PTsecurity\] Apache Continuum <= v1.4.2 CMD Injection"; content: "POST"; http\_method; content: "/continuum/saveInstallation.action"; offset: 0; depth: 34; http\_uri; content: "installation.varValue="; nocase; http\_client\_body; pcre: !"/^\\$?\[\\sa-z\\\\\_0-9.-\]\*(\\&|$)/iRP"; flow: to\_server, established;sid: 10000048; rev: 1;)
    

Resource for Further Learning
-----------------------------

For those looking to expand their knowledge of Suricata rule development, a detailed guide is available here: [Suricata Rule Documentation](https://docs.suricata.io/en/latest/rules/index.html)

IDS/IPS Rule Development Strategies
-----------------------------------

Creating rules for Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) is both an art and a science. It requires a thorough understanding of network protocols, malware behaviour, and system vulnerabilities.

Common approaches in IDS/IPS rule development include:

*   **Signature-based Detection:** This method focuses on detecting specific patterns within network traffic, such as unique strings or commands associated with known malware. While highly effective for identifying known threats, it struggles with novel or zero-day attacks.
*   **Behaviour-based Detection:** This strategy aims to identify unusual behaviours that could indicate malware, such as abnormal HTTP response sizes or strange data transfer patterns. While more effective against unknown threats, it can produce higher false-positive rates.
*   **Stateful Protocol Analysis:** This approach tracks the state of network connections and compares observed behaviour against expected protocol transitions. It helps identify deviations that could indicate malicious activity.

Suricata Rule Development Examples
==================================

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's RDP into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.

        xfreerdp /u:htb-student /p:'HTB\_@cademy\_stdnt!' /v:\[Target IP\] /dynamic-resolution /relax-order-checks +glyph-cache
    

Now, we will explore several examples of Suricata rule development to gain a solid understanding of the different approaches we can take and the structure of a rule.

Suricata Rule Development Example 1: Detecting PowerShell Empire
----------------------------------------------------------------

        alert http $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET any (msg:"ET MALWARE Possible PowerShell Empire Activity Outbound"; flow:established,to\_server; content:"GET"; http\_method; content:"/"; http\_uri; depth:1; pcre:"/^(?:login\\/process|admin\\/get|news)\\.php$/RU"; content:"session="; http\_cookie; pcre:"/^(?:\[A-Z0-9+/\]{4})\*(?:\[A-Z0-9+/\]{2}==|\[A-Z0-9+/\]{3}=|\[A-Z0-9+/\]{4})$/CRi"; content:"Mozilla|2f|5.0|20 28|Windows|20|NT|20|6.1"; http\_user\_agent; http\_start; content:".php|20|HTTP|2f|1.1|0d 0a|Cookie|3a 20|session="; fast\_pattern; http\_header\_names; content:!"Referer"; content:!"Cache"; content:!"Accept"; sid:2027512; rev:1;)
    

The Suricata rule above is designed to detect possible outbound activity from PowerShell Empire, a common post-exploitation framework used by attackers. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **alert:** This is the rule action, indicating that Suricata should generate an alert whenever the conditions specified in the rule options are met.
*   **http:** This is the rule protocol. It specifies that the rule applies to HTTP traffic.
*   **$HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET any:** These are the source and destination IP address specifications. The rule will be triggered when HTTP traffic originates from any port (any) on a host within the $HOME\_NET (internal network) and is destined to any port (any) on a host in the $EXTERNAL\_NET (external network).
*   **msg:"ET MALWARE Possible PowerShell Empire Activity Outbound":** This is the message that will be included in the alert to describe what the rule is looking for.
*   **flow:established,to\_server:** This specifies the direction of the traffic. The rule is looking for established connections where data is flowing to the server.
*   **content:"GET"; http\_method;** This matches the HTTP GET method in the HTTP request.
*   **content:"/"; http\_uri; depth:1;** This matches the root directory ("/") in the URI.
*   **pcre:"/^(?:login\\/process|admin\\/get|news)\\.php$/RU";** This Perl Compatible Regular Expression (PCRE) is looking for URIs that end with login/process.php, admin/get.php, or news.php.
*   **content:"session="; http\_cookie;** This is looking for the string "session=" in the HTTP cookie.
*   **pcre:"/^(?:\[A-Z0-9+/\]{4})\*(?:\[A-Z0-9+/\]{2}==|\[A-Z0-9+/\]{3}=|\[A-Z0-9+/\]{4})$/CRi";** This PCRE is checking for base64-encoded data in the Cookie.
*   **content:"Mozilla|2f|5.0|20 28|Windows|20|NT|20|6.1"; http\_user\_agent; http\_start;** This matches a specific User-Agent string that includes "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1".
*   **content:".php|20|HTTP|2f|1.1|0d 0a|Cookie|3a 20|session="; fast\_pattern; http\_header\_names;** This matches a pattern in the HTTP headers that starts with ".php HTTP/1.1\\r\\nCookie: session=".
*   **content:!"Referer"; content:!"Cache"; content:!"Accept";** These are negative content matches. The rule will only trigger if the HTTP headers do not contain "Referer", "Cache", and "Accept".

This Suricata rule triggers an alert when it detects an established HTTP GET request from our network to an external network, with a specific pattern in the URI, cookie, and user-agent fields, and excluding certain headers.

The above rule is already incorporated in the `local.rules` file found in the /home/htb-student directory of this section's target. To test it, first, you need to uncomment the rule. Then, execute Suricata on the `psempire.pcap` file, which is located in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory.

        sudo suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/psempire.pcap -l . -k none
        cat fast.log
    

The local.rules file contains another rule for detecting PowerShell Empire, located directly below the rule we just examined. Invest some time in scrutinizing both the `psempire.pcap` file using Wireshark and this newly found rule to comprehend how it works.

Suricata Rule Development Example 2: Detecting Covenant
-------------------------------------------------------

        alert tcp any any -> $HOME\_NET any (msg:"detected by body"; content:"Hello World!"; detection\_filter: track by\_src, count 4 , seconds 10; priority:1; sid:3000011;)
    

The (inefficient) Suricata rule above is designed to detect certain variations of Covenant, another common post-exploitation framework used by attackers. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **alert:** This is the rule action. When the conditions in the rule options are met, Suricata will generate an alert.
*   **tcp:** This is the rule protocol. The rule applies to TCP traffic.
*   **any any -> $HOME\_NET any:** These are the source and destination IP address and port specifications. The rule is watching for TCP traffic that originates from any IP and any port (any any) and is destined for any port (any) on a host in the $HOME\_NET (internal network).
*   **content:"Hello World!";** This instructs Suricata to look for the string `<title>Hello World!</title>` in the TCP payload.
*   **detection\_filter: track by\_src, count 4, seconds 10;** This is a post-detection filter. It specifies that the rule should track the source IP address (by\_src) and will only trigger an alert if this same detection happens at least 4 times (count 4) within a 10-second window (seconds 10).

This Suricata rule is designed to generate a high-priority alert if it detects at least four instances of TCP traffic within ten seconds that contain the string `<title>Hello World!</title>` in the payload, originating from the same source IP and headed towards any host on our internal network.

The above rule is already incorporated in the `local.rules` file found in the /home/htb-student directory of this section's target. To test it, first, you need to uncomment the rule. Then, execute Suricata on the `covenant.pcap` file, which is located in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory.

        sudo suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/covenant.pcap -l . -k none
        cat fast.log
    

The local.rules file contains three (3) other rules for detecting Covenant, located directly below the rule we just examined. Invest some time in scrutinizing [this repository](https://github.com/cobbr/Covenant/blob/master/Covenant/Data/Profiles/DefaultHttpProfile.yaml), the `covenant.pcap` file using Wireshark, and these newly found rules to comprehend how they work. These rules may yield false-positive results, and hence for optimal performance, it's advisable to integrate them with other detection rules.

Suricata Rule Development Example 3: Detecting Covenant (Using Analytics)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

        alert tcp $HOME\_NET any -> any any (msg:"detected by size and counter"; dsize:312; detection\_filter: track by\_src, count 3 , seconds 10; priority:1; sid:3000001;)
    

The local.rules file also contains the above rule for detecting Covenant. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **dsize:312;** This instructs Suricata to look for TCP traffic with a data payload size of exactly 312 bytes.
*   **detection\_filter: track by\_src, count 3 , seconds 10;** This is a post-detection filter. It says that the rule should keep track of the source IP

### QUESTION

####  In the /home/htb-student directory of this section's target, there is a file called local.rules. Within this file, there is a rule with sid 2024217, which is associated with the MS17-010 exploit. Additionally, there is a PCAP file named eternalblue.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory, which contains network traffic related to MS17-010. What is the minimum offset value that can be set to trigger an alert?
ANSWER:




Suricata Rule Development Part 2: Detecting Encrypted Traffic
=============================================================

As network security continues to evolve, one challenge that has grown in significance is encrypted traffic. While encryption is essential for protecting sensitive information, it also presents a barrier to detecting malicious activity. In particular, developing reliable Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) rules becomes more complicated when dealing with encrypted traffic.

However, there are several strategies that can still be leveraged to spot potential security threats. Two key areas to focus on are SSL/TLS certificates and the JA3 fingerprint.

SSL/TLS Certificates
--------------------

When a device establishes an SSL/TLS connection, it exchanges SSL/TLS certificates during the initial handshake. While much of the connection is encrypted, these certificates contain critical information that remains unencrypted, such as:

*   Issuer details
*   Issue and expiry dates
*   Subject information (including domain names)

Malicious or suspicious domains often use SSL/TLS certificates with peculiar or atypical characteristics. By recognising these anomalies, we can create effective detection rules for Suricata.

JA3 Hash Fingerprinting
-----------------------

Another powerful tool is the JA3 hash, a method used for SSL/TLS client fingerprinting. This method extracts data from the client hello packet during the SSL/TLS handshake, creating a unique fingerprint for each client. This hash can be especially useful for detecting malware families or other suspicious software, making it a valuable asset when developing detection rules for encrypted traffic.

Hands-On Exercise
-----------------

Next, let's proceed to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. This will allow you to replicate the commands from this section, giving you a more hands-on understanding of the material discussed.

Example 5: Detecting Dridex (TLS Encrypted)
-------------------------------------------

Consider the following Suricata rule designed to detect Dridex, a type of malware transmitted over TLS. This rule triggers when a TLS session from an external network to the home network contains specific byte patterns associated with SSL certificates used by Dridex, as flagged by the SSL blacklist on abuse.ch:

alert tls $EXTERNAL\_NET any -> $HOME\_NET any (msg:"ET MALWARE ABUSE.CH SSL Blacklist Malicious SSL certificate detected (Dridex)"; flow:established,from\_server; content:"|16|"; content:"|0b|"; within:8; byte\_test:3,<,1200,0,relative; content:"|03 02 01 02 02 09 00|"; fast\_pattern; content:"|30 09 06 03 55 04 06 13 02|"; distance:0; pcre:"/^\[A-Z\]{2}/R"; content:"|55 04 07|"; distance:0; content:"|55 04 0a|"; distance:0; pcre:"/^.{2}\[A-Z\]\[a-z\]{3,}\\s(?:\[A-Z\]\[a-z\]{3,}\\s)?(?:\[A-Z\](?:\[A-Za-z\]{0,4}?\[A-Z\]|(?:\\.\[A-Za-z\]){1,3})|\[A-Z\]?\[a-z\]+|\[a-z\](?:\\.\[A-Za-z\]){1,3})\\.?\[01\]/Rs"; content:"|55 04 03|"; distance:0; byte\_test:1,>,13,1,relative; content:!"www."; distance:2; within:4; pcre:"/^.{2}(?P(?:(?:\\d?\[A-Z\]?|\[A-Z\]?\\d?)(?:\[a-z\]{3,20}|\[a-z\]{3,6}\[0-9\_\]\[a-z\]{3,6})\\.){0,2}?(?:\\d?\[A-Z\]?|\[A-Z\]?\\d?)\[a-z\]{3,}(?:\[0-9\_-\]\[a-z\]{3,})?\\.(?!com|org|net|tv)\[a-z\]{2,9})\[01\].\*?(?P=CN)\[01\]/Rs"; content:!"|2a 86 48 86 f7 0d 01 09 01|"; content:!"GoDaddy"; sid:2023476; rev:5;)
        

### Breakdown of the Rule

Let's quickly break down the most important elements of this rule:

*   **content:"|16|"; content:"|0b|"; within:8;**: This part of the rule checks for the presence of the handshake message (0x16) and the certificate type (0x0b) within the first 8 bytes of the payload.
*   **content:"|03 02 01 02 02 09 00|"; fast\_pattern;**: This searches for a specific byte pattern that may be characteristic of the Dridex SSL certificate.
*   **content:"|30 09 06 03 55 04 06 13 02|"; distance:0; pcre:"/^\[A-Z\]{2}/R";**: This checks for the 'countryName' field in the certificate's subject, ensuring that the value begins with two uppercase letters (standard for country codes).
*   **content:"|55 04 07|"; distance:0;**: This identifies the 'localityName' field in the certificate's subject.
*   **content:"|55 04 0a|"; distance:0;**: This checks for the 'organizationName' field.
*   **content:"|55 04 03|"; distance:0; byte\_test:1,>,13,1,relative;**: This ensures that the 'commonName' field in the certificate's subject has more than 13 bytes.

For additional reading, you can explore a detailed resource on Dridex SSL certificates [here](https://www.abuse.ch/).

### Testing the Rule

The rule has already been added to the `local.rules` file, which is located in the `/home/htb-student` directory of the target system. To test the rule, uncomment it, then run Suricata on the `dridex.pcap` file, located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory:

sudo suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/dridex.pcap -l . -k none
cat fast.log
        

Example 6: Detecting Sliver (TLS Encrypted)
-------------------------------------------

This Suricata rule is designed to detect the Sliver C2 (Command and Control) traffic over SSL by matching a specific JA3 hash:

alert tls any any -> any any (msg:"Sliver C2 SSL"; ja3.hash; content:"473cd7cb9faa642487833865d516e578"; sid:1002; rev:1;)
        

To calculate the JA3 hash, use the following command on the `sliverenc.pcap` file, which is also located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory:

ja3 -a --json /home/htb-student/pcaps/sliverenc.pcap
        

Just like the previous example, this rule is incorporated in the `local.rules` file. To test it, uncomment the rule and execute Suricata on the `sliverenc.pcap` file:

sudo suricata -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/sliverenc.pcap -l . -k none
cat fast.log

### QUESTION

#### There is a file named trickbot.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory, which contains network traffic related to a certain variation of the Trickbot malware. Enter the precise string that should be specified in the content keyword of the rule with sid 100299 within the local.rules file so that an alert is triggered as your answer.
ANSWER:


<button onclick="history.back()">Go Back</button>
