---
layout: post
title:  "Zeek: Working with IDS/IPS"
date: 2025-03-9
author: C. Casquatch
comments: false
tag: ['zeek', 'ids', 'ips', 'htb']
---

With its impressive functionality, ability to run on standard hardware, and robust scripting language, Zeek proves to be much more than just another signature-based IDS. It serves as a platform that facilitates semantic misuse detection, anomaly detection, and behavioural analysis.

Zeek's Operation Modes
----------------------

*   Fully passive traffic analysis
*   libpcap interface for packet capture
*   Real-time and offline (e.g., PCAP-based) analysis
*   Cluster support for large-scale deployments

Zeek's Architecture
-------------------

Zeek's architecture consists of two main components: the event engine (or core) and the script interpreter.

The event engine processes incoming packet streams, transforming them into high-level events. In Zeek, these events describe network activity in policy-neutral terms, meaning they inform us about what's happening but don't provide any interpretation or analysis. For instance, an HTTP request is transformed into an `http_request` event. While this event provides all the relevant details of the request, it does not analyse whether the port in question is associated with malicious activity.

Interpretation and analysis are performed by Zeek's script interpreter, which executes event handlers written in Zeek's scripting language. These scripts express the site's security policies, specifying actions to be taken when specific events are detected.

Events generated by Zeek's core are queued in an orderly manner for processing, typically on a first-come, first-served basis. Most Zeek events are defined in `.bif` files, located in the `/scripts/base/bif/plugins/` directory. For a more comprehensive list of events, refer to the following resource: [Zeek Event List](https://docs.zeek.org/en/stable/scripts/base/bif/).

Zeek Logs
---------

When performing offline analysis on a PCAP file, Zeek logs will be stored in the current directory.

Some of the common logs produced by Zeek include:

*   `conn.log`: Details of IP, TCP, UDP, and ICMP connections
*   `dns.log`: Details of DNS queries and responses
*   `http.log`: Details of HTTP requests and responses
*   `ftp.log`: Logs FTP requests and responses
*   `smtp.log`: Logs SMTP transactions such as sender and recipient details

Let's focus on the `http.log` as an example. This log provides valuable data, including:

*   `host`: The HTTP domain or IP address
*   `uri`: The HTTP URI
*   `referrer`: The HTTP request referrer
*   `user_agent`: The client’s user agent
*   `status_code`: The HTTP status code

For a more exhaustive list of common Zeek logs and their respective fields, refer to the following resource: [Zeek Log Documentation](https://docs.zeek.org/en/master/logs/index.html).

It’s worth noting that Zeek, by default, applies gzip compression to logs every hour. Older logs are transferred to directories named in the `YYYY-MM-DD` format. When dealing with these compressed logs, tools such as `gzcat` for viewing logs or `zgrep` for searching within logs are quite handy.

For guidance on working with gzip-compressed Zeek logs, check out this article: [Working with Zeek Logs](https://blog.rapid7.com/2016/06/02/working-with-bro-logs-queries-by-example/).

Zeek also provides the `zeek-cut` utility for handling log files. This tool accepts Zeek log files via standard input and outputs the specified columns to the standard output, making it more efficient for log analysis.

If you’re interested in Zeek examples, use cases, and getting started with Zeek scripting, explore the following resources:

*   [Zeek Examples and Use Cases](https://docs.zeek.org/en/stable/examples/index.html)
*   [Zeek Quickstart Guide](https://docs.zeek.org/en/stable/quickstart/index.html)

Zeek Key Features
-----------------

The key features that make Zeek an effective tool include:

*   Comprehensive logging of network activities
*   Analysis of application-layer protocols (including HTTP, DNS, FTP, SMTP, SSH, SSL, etc.)
*   Ability to inspect file content exchanged over application-layer protocols
*   IPv6 support
*   Tunnel detection and analysis
*   Protocol sanity checks
*   IDS-like pattern matching
*   A powerful, domain-aware scripting language that enables arbitrary analysis tasks and network state management over time
*   Well-structured ASCII log output, with alternative backends for ElasticSearch and DataSeries
*   Real-time integration of external input into analyses
*   External C library for sharing Zeek events with external programs
*   The ability to trigger external processes from within Zeek’s scripting language




Intrusion Detection with Zeek
=============================

As we’ve previously discussed, Zeek (formerly known as Bro) is a robust tool used for network security monitoring, enabling us to thoroughly examine our network traffic and gather actionable insights.

The flexibility and extensibility of Zeek make it an essential component for advanced network intrusion detection and forensic investigation. With its wide range of logs and scripting capabilities, Zeek allows us to tailor it to our specific needs for detecting suspicious activity and continuously enhancing our security posture.

Next, navigate to the end of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". After that, SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The majority of the commands covered from this point forward can be replicated on the target, offering a more detailed understanding of the topics discussed.

Intrusion Detection with Zeek: Example 1 – Detecting Beaconing Malware
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Beaconing is a technique used by malware to communicate with its command and control (C2) server for instructions or to exfiltrate data. It is often characterised by regular or patterned outbound communication.

To identify beaconing behaviour, we can analyse Zeek's connection logs (`conn.log`) for patterns such as repeated connections to the same destination IP or domain, consistent data sizes in sent packets, or regular connection intervals. These anomalies can indicate beaconing activity. Zeek scripts can be created to detect these patterns more effectively.

        /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek -C -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/psempire.pcap
        cat conn.log
    

If you examine the `conn.log` file, you'll observe connections to `51.15.197.127:80` every 5 seconds, suggesting beaconing malware activity. The `psempire.pcap` file, located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory, contains traffic related to PowerShell Empire, which by default sends a beacon every 5 seconds.

To download the PCAP file, use the following command:

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/psempire.pcap .
    

Intrusion Detection with Zeek: Example 2 – Detecting DNS Exfiltration
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Zeek is also valuable for detecting data exfiltration, which can be hard to spot as it often mimics legitimate network traffic. By examining traffic at a deeper level, Zeek helps uncover covert data exfiltration attempts.

Zeek’s `files.log` file can identify large amounts of data being transferred to unusual external destinations or over non-standard ports, which may suggest data exfiltration. Additionally, the `http.log` and `dns.log` logs can help pinpoint covert exfiltration channels, such as DNS tunnelling or suspicious HTTP POST requests.

        /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek -C -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/dnsexfil.pcapng
        cat dns.log
    

To focus on the queried subdomains, use `zeek-cut` as follows:

        cat dns.log | /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek-cut query | cut -d . -f1-7
    

Upon inspection, you'll notice that the domain `letsgohunt.online` has an unusually large number of subdomains, a pattern commonly seen with cloud providers. However, it is important to note that this kind of behaviour is atypical and may warrant further investigation.

The `dnsexfil.pcapng` file, located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory, includes traffic related to DNS exfiltration.

To download the PCAP file, use the following command:

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/dnsexfil.pcapng .
    

Intrusion Detection with Zeek: Example 3 – Detecting TLS Exfiltration
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Data exfiltration can also occur over TLS, and Zeek can help us detect such activity. TLS traffic is often encrypted, making it more difficult to detect. However, with Zeek, we can monitor connection patterns and data transfer volumes to identify potential exfiltration attempts.

        /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek -C -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/tlsexfil.pcap
        cat conn.log
    

To better analyse the output, we can filter it using `zeek-cut`:

        cat conn.log | /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek-cut id.orig\_h id.resp\_h orig\_bytes | sort | grep -v -e '^$' | grep -v '-' | datamash -g 1,2 sum 3 | sort -k 3 -rn | head -10
    

This command processes the `conn.log` file, extracting details such as the originating and responding hosts and the number of bytes transferred. The output will show the top 10 IP address pairs with the most data sent.

We can see that approximately 270 MB of data was sent to `192.168.151.181`.

The `tlsexfil.pcap` file, located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory, contains traffic related to TLS exfiltration.

To download the PCAP file, use the following command:

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/tlsexfil.pcap .
    

Intrusion Detection with Zeek: Example 4 – Detecting PsExec
-----------------------------------------------------------

PsExec, part of the Sysinternals Suite, is commonly used for remote administration in Active Directory environments. However, attackers often exploit PsExec to execute malicious code remotely. Zeek can be used to detect this activity by analysing SMB traffic.

        /usr/local/zeek/bin/zeek -C -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/psexec\_add\_user.pcap
        cat smb\_files.log
        cat dce\_rpc.log
        cat smb\_mapping.log
    

The SMB file transfers and service creations can be detected in the logs, which indicate typical PsExec usage.

The `psexec_add_user.pcap` file, located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory, includes traffic related to PsExec usage.

To download the PCAP file, use the following command:

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/psexec\_add\_user.pcap .
    

PCAP credits: Oleh Levytskyi and Bogdan Vennyk


### QUESTIONS

#### There is a file named printnightmare.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory, which contains network traffic related to the PrintNightmare (https://labs.jumpsec.com/printnightmare-network-analysis/) vulnerability. Enter the zeek log that can help us identify the suspicious spooler functions as your answer. Answer format: _.log
ANSWER:

#### There is a file named revilkaseya.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory, which contains network traffic related to the REvil ransomware Kaseya supply chain attack. Enter the total number of bytes that the victim has transmitted to the IP address 178.23.155.240 as your answer.
ANSWER:



<button onclick="history.back()">Go Back</button>
