---
layout: post
title:  "Snort: Working with IDS/IPS"
date: 2025-03-9
author: C. Casquatch
comments: false
tag: ['snort', 'ids', 'ips', 'htb']
---


Snort is an open-source solution that functions as both an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and an Intrusion Prevention System (IPS). It can also operate as a packet logger or sniffer, similar to Suricata. By thoroughly examining network traffic, Snort can detect and record all activities, offering a detailed view and logs of all application-layer transactions. To guide Snort on how to inspect traffic and what to look for, specific rule sets are required. Snort is designed to run efficiently on both general-purpose and custom hardware.

Snort Operation Modes
---------------------

Snort can operate in various modes:

*   Inline IDS/IPS
*   Passive IDS
*   Network-based IDS
*   Host-based IDS (though Snort is not primarily suited to be a host-based IDS, more specialised tools are recommended for this purpose)

According to Snort's documentation:

> "With certain DAQ modules, Snort can operate in either passive or inline mode. Passive mode allows Snort to detect traffic on a network interface without blocking any traffic. Inline mode enables Snort to actively block traffic when certain packets trigger an alert. The mode Snort uses depends on the options set at the command line. For instance, using the -r option to read from a pcap file or the -i option to listen on an interface puts Snort into passive mode by default. If the DAQ supports inline, the -Q flag can be used to run Snort in inline mode."

Snort Architecture
------------------

Snort evolved from a basic packet sniffer to a full-fledged IDS by incorporating several important components, including:

*   **Packet Sniffer:** This includes the Packet Decoder, which extracts network traffic and identifies the structure of each packet. The raw packets are passed on to the preprocessors.
*   **Preprocessors:** These analyse the packets' type and behaviour. For example, the HTTP preprocessor identifies HTTP traffic, and the port\_scan preprocessor looks for signs of port scanning, based on specific protocols, scan types, and thresholds. After the preprocessing is done, data is sent to the Detection Engine.
*   **Detection Engine:** This component compares incoming packets against Snort’s rule set. If there’s a match, the data is forwarded to the Logging and Alerting System.
*   **Logging and Alerting System:** This system logs events or triggers alerts based on rules set by the user. The data is generally saved in formats like syslog or unified2, or directly in a database.

Snort Configuration & Validating Snort's Configuration
------------------------------------------------------

Snort provides a range of configuration options, and the open-source Snort 3 offers pre-configured files to get users up and running quickly. The two main configuration files, `snort.lua` and `snort_defaults.lua`, serve as the foundation for Snort setup, providing a standard configuration framework.

The `snort.lua` file contains several key sections:

*   Network Variables
*   Decoder Configuration
*   Base Detection Engine Configuration
*   Dynamic Library Configuration
*   Preprocessor Configuration
*   Output Plugin Configuration
*   Rule Set Customisation

To view the `snort.lua` file on your system, use the command:

    sudo more /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua

You can explore Snort 3 modules and their descriptions using the command:

    snort --help-modules

To pass and validate configuration files, you can use the following command:

    snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua --daq-dir /usr/local/lib/daq

It’s also essential to read the comments inside the `snort.lua` file, as they contain valuable insights into configuring Snort.

Snort Inputs
------------

One of the simplest ways to observe Snort in action is by processing a packet capture file. You can do so by specifying the pcap file with the `-r` option:

    sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua --daq-dir /usr/local/lib/daq -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/icmp.pcap

Snort can also listen on active network interfaces using the `-i` option, followed by the interface name:

    snort -i eth0

Snort Rules
-----------

Snort rules are similar to Suricata rules, composed of a rule header and rule options. To get a deeper understanding of Snort rule writing, it's advised to consult resources such as [Snort Documentation](https://docs.snort.org/) and [Suricata vs Snort Rules](https://docs.suricata.io/en/latest/rules/differences-from-snort.html).

To load rules, they can either be directly included in the `snort.lua` configuration file, or passed via the command line. Use the `-R` option for a single rule file, or the `--rule-path` option for an entire directory:

    sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua -R /home/htb-student/local.rules

Snort Outputs
-------------

Given the volume of data Snort may generate, here’s a breakdown of the output types:

*   **Basic Statistics:** Includes packet statistics, module statistics, and file statistics.
*   **Alerts:** Triggered by configured rules and viewable with the `-A` option. Output formats include `-A cmg`, `-A u2`, and `-A csv`.
*   **Performance Statistics:** Use the `perf_monitor` and `profiler` modules to track Snort's performance metrics.

For example, to display alerts in `cmg` format, use:

    sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/icmp.pcap -A cmg

Snort Key Features
------------------

Some of Snort’s key features include:

*   Deep Packet Inspection, Packet Capture, and Logging
*   Intrusion Detection
*   Network Security Monitoring
*   Anomaly Detection
*   IPv6 and IPv4 Support
*   Multi-Tenant Support

### QUESTION

#### There is a file named wannamine.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory. Run Snort on this PCAP file and enter how many times the rule with sid 1000001 was triggered as your answer.
ANSWER:


  Snort Rule Development

Snort Rule Development
======================

A Snort rule, at its core, is a powerful tool that we use to identify and flag potential malicious activity in network traffic.

As already discussed, Snort rules resemble Suricata rules. They are composed of a rule header and rule options. Even though Snort rules share similarities with Suricata rules, we strongly suggest studying Snort rule writing from the following resources: [Snort Documentation](https://docs.snort.org/) and [Suricata vs Snort Rule Differences](https://docs.suricata.io/en/latest/rules/differences-from-snort.html).

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.

Let's move forward and explore some examples of crafting Snort rules to counter real-world malware threats.

Snort Rule Development Example 1: Detecting Ursnif (Inefficiently)
------------------------------------------------------------------

        alert tcp any any -> any any (msg:"Possible Ursnif C2 Activity"; flow:established,to\_server; content:"/images/", depth 12; content:"\_2F"; content:"\_2B"; content:"User-Agent|3a 20|Mozilla/4.0 (compatible|3b| MSIE 8.0|3b| Windows NT"; content:!"Accept"; content:!"Cookie|3a|"; content:!"Referer|3a|"; sid:1000002; rev:1;)
    

The Snort rule above is designed to detect certain variations of Ursnif malware. The rule is inefficient since it misses HTTP sticky buffers. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **flow:established,to\_server;** ensures that this rule only matches established TCP connections where data is flowing from the client to the server.
*   **content:"/images/", depth 12;** instructs Snort to look for the string /images/ within the first 12 bytes of the packet payload.
*   **content:"\_2F"; and content:"\_2B";** direct Snort to search for the strings \_2F and \_2B anywhere in the payload.
*   **content:"User-Agent|3a 20|Mozilla/4.0 (compatible|3b| MSIE 8.0|3b| Windows NT";** is looking for a specific User-Agent. The |3a 20| and |3b| in the rule are hexadecimal representations of the : and ; characters respectively.
*   **content:!"Accept"; content:!"Cookie|3a|"; content:!"Referer|3a|";** look for the absence of certain standard HTTP headers, such as Accept, Cookie:, and Referer:. The ! indicates negation.

The above rule is already incorporated in the local.rules file found in the `/home/htb-student` directory of this section's target. To test it, first, you need to uncomment the rule. Then, execute Snort on the ursnif.pcap file, which is located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory.

        sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua --daq-dir /usr/local/lib/daq -R /home/htb-student/local.rules -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/ursnif.pcap -A cmg
    

Invest some time in scrutinising both the ursnif.pcap file using Wireshark and this rule to comprehend how it works.

We can download the PCAP file into the current directory of either Pwnbox or our own VM as follows.

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/ursnif.pcap .
    

Snort Rule Development Example 2: Detecting Cerber
--------------------------------------------------

        alert udp $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET any (msg:"Possible Cerber Check-in"; dsize:9; content:"hi", depth 2, fast\_pattern; pcre:"/^\[af0-9\]{7}$/R"; detection\_filter:track by\_src, count 1, seconds 60; sid:2816763; rev:4;)
    

The Snort rule above is designed to detect certain variations of Cerber malware. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **$HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET any** signifies the rule applies to any UDP traffic going from any port in the home network to any port on external networks.
*   **dsize:9;** This is a condition that restricts the rule to UDP datagrams that have a payload data size of exactly 9 bytes.
*   **content:"hi", depth 2, fast\_pattern;** This checks the payload's first 2 bytes for the string hi. The fast\_pattern modifier makes the pattern matcher search for this pattern before any others in the rule, optimising the rule's performance.
*   **pcre:"/^\[af0-9\]{7}$/R";** This stands for Perl Compatible Regular Expressions. The rule is looking for seven hexadecimal characters (from the set a-f and 0-9) starting at the beginning of the payload (after the hi), and this should be the complete payload (signified by the $ end anchor).
*   **detection\_filter:track by\_src, count 1, seconds 60;** The detection\_filter keyword in Snort rule language is used to suppress alerts unless a certain threshold of matched events occurs within a specified time frame. In this rule, the filter is set to track by source IP (by\_src), with a count of 1 and within a time frame of 60 seconds. This means that the rule will trigger an alert only if it matches more than one event (specifically, more than count events which is 1 here) from the same source IP address within 60 seconds.

The above rule is already incorporated in the local.rules file found in the `/home/htb-student` directory of this section's target. To test it, first, you need to uncomment the rule. Then, execute Snort on the cerber.pcap file, which is located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory.

        sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua --daq-dir /usr/local/lib/daq -R /home/htb-student/local.rules -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/cerber.pcap -A cmg
    

Invest some time in scrutinising both the cerber.pcap file using Wireshark and this rule to comprehend how it works.

We can download the PCAP file into the current directory of either Pwnbox or our own VM as follows.

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/cerber.pcap .
    

Snort Rule Development Example 3: Detecting Patchwork
-----------------------------------------------------

        alert http $HOME\_NET any -> $EXTERNAL\_NET any (msg:"OISF TROJAN Targeted AutoIt FileStealer/Downloader CnC Beacon"; flow:established,to\_server; http\_method; content:"POST"; http\_uri; content:".php?profile="; http\_client\_body; content:"ddager=", depth 7; http\_client\_body; content:"&r1=", distance 0; http\_header; content:!"Accept"; http\_header; content:!"Referer|3a|"; sid:10000006; rev:1;)
    

The Snort rule above is designed to detect certain variations of malware used by the Patchwork APT. Please notice the use of HTTP sticky buffers in this rule. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **flow:established,to\_server;** This keyword is used to specify the direction of the traffic we are interested in. In this case, we're looking at established connections where the traffic is going from the client to the server.
*   **http\_method; content:"POST";** We are looking for HTTP traffic where the method used is POST.
*   **http\_uri; content:".php?profile=";** This specifies that we're looking for HTTP URIs that contain the string .php?profile=.
*   **http\_client\_body; content:"ddager=", depth 7;** We're examining the body of the HTTP request. Specifically, we're looking for the string ddager= within the first 7 bytes of the body.
*   **http\_client\_body; content:"&r1=", distance 0;** We're still examining the body of the HTTP request, but now we're looking for the string &r1= immediately following the previous content match.
*   **http\_header; content:!"Accept"; http\_header; content:!"Referer|3a|";** These conditions are looking for the absence of the Accept and Referer HTTP headers. The ! before the content means not, so we're looking for situations where these headers are not present.

The above rule is already incorporated in the local.rules file found in the `/home/htb-student` directory of this section's target. To test it, first, you need to uncomment the rule. Then, execute Snort on the patchwork.pcap file, which is located in the `/home/htb-student/pcaps` directory.

        sudo snort -c /root/snorty/etc/snort/snort.lua --daq-dir /usr/local/lib/daq -R /home/htb-student/local.rules -r /home/htb-student/pcaps/patchwork.pcap -A cmg
    

Invest some time in scrutinising both the patchwork.pcap file using Wireshark and this rule to comprehend how it works.

We can download the PCAP file into the current directory of either Pwnbox or our own VM as follows.

        scp htb-student@\[TARGET IP\]:/home/htb-student/pcaps/patchwork.pcap .
    

Snort Rule Development Example 4: Detecting Patchwork (SSL)
-----------------------------------------------------------

        alert tcp $EXTERNAL\_NET any -> $HOME\_NET any (msg:"Patchwork SSL Cert Detected"; flow:established,from\_server; content:"|55 04 03|"; content:"|08|toigetgf", distance 1, within 9; classtype:trojan-activity; sid:10000008; rev:1;)
    

The Snort rule above is designed to detect certain variations of malware used by the Patchwork APT. Let's break down the important parts of this rule to understand its workings.

*   **flow:established,from\_server;** This keyword pair signifies that we're interested in observing established flows of traffic originating from the server.
*   **content:"|55 04 03|";** This rule is looking for the specific hex values 55 04 03 within the payload of the packet. These hex values represent the ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One) tag for the "common name" field in an X.509 certificate, which is often used in SSL/TLS certificates to denote the domain name that the certificate applies to.
*   **content:"|08|toigetgf", distance 1, within 9;** Following the common name field, this rule looks for the string toigetgf. The distance 1 means that Snort should start looking for the string toigetgf 1 byte after the end of the previous content match. The within 9 sets an upper limit on how far into the packet's payload Snort should search, starting from the beginning of this content field.

### QUESTION

#### There is a file named log4shell.pcap in the /home/htb-student/pcaps directory, which contains network traffic related to log4shell exploitation attempts, where the payload is embedded within the user agent. Enter the keyword that should be specified right before the content keyword of the rule with sid 10000098 within the local.rules file so that an alert is triggered as your answer. Answer format: [keyword];
ANSWER:


<button onclick="history.back()">Go Back</button>
