---
layout: post
title:  "TidBit 19"
date:   2024-09-03
author: C. Casquatch
comments: false
tag: ['Yara', 'Sigma', 'Chainsaw']
---

# TidBit 19, created from weekly writing 19

Completing the Yara and Sigma room in HTB. Almost full module walkthrough...

Notes:
to RDP from Powershell inside Parrot OS - examples
xfreerdp /v:10.129.228.137:3389 /u:htb-student
Using xfreerdp as the program
/v:<server>:<port>
/u:<username>
submit password when asked to verify certificate. 

 
We used [Threat Report: Illuminating Volume Shadow Deletion - VMware Security Blog - VMware](https://blogs.vmware.com/security/2022/09/threat-report-illuminating-volume-shadow-deletion.html) to better understand VSD.
 
This was my sigma>powershell command/script for identifying the malicious driver within the lab_events_4.evtx file. 
Get-WinEvent -Path C:\Events\YARASigma\lab_events_4.evtx | where {($_.ID -eq "1006" -or $_.ID -eq "1116" -or $_.ID -eq "1015" -or $_.ID -eq "1117") } | select TimeCreated,Id,RecordId,ProcessId,MachineName,Message
 
Then we used Chainsaw and sigma rules to hunt for a suspicious Defender exclusion inside a file.
Our command was: .\chainsaw_x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.exe hunt C:\Events\YARASigma\lab_events_5.evtx -s C:\Tools\chainsaw\sigma\rules\windows\powershell\powershell_script\posh_ps_win_defender_exclusions_added.yml --mapping .\mappings\sigma-event-logs-all.yml
We had to name the directory. In this case - document\virus
 
For the sigma/splunk conversion, the command was: python sigmac -t splunk C:\Rules\sigma\file_event_win_app_dropping_archive.yml -c .\config\splunk-windows.yml

and the output for splunk rule was: 
```
((Image="\winword.exe" OR Image="\excel.exe" OR Image="\powerpnt.exe" OR Image="\msaccess.exe" OR Image="\mspub.exe" OR Image="\eqnedt32.exe" OR Image="\visio.exe" OR Image="\wordpad.exe" OR Image="\wordview.exe" OR Image="\certutil.exe" OR Image="\certoc.exe" OR Image="\CertReq.exe" OR Image="\Desktopimgdownldr.exe" OR Image="\esentutl.exe" OR Image="\finger.exe" OR Image="\notepad.exe" OR Image="\AcroRd32.exe" OR Image="\RdrCEF.exe" OR Image="\mshta.exe" OR Image="\hh.exe" OR Image="\sharphound.exe") (TargetFilename=".zip" OR TargetFilename=".rar" OR TargetFilename=".7z" OR TargetFilename=".diagcab" OR TargetFilename=".appx"))
```
 
The one I struggled with was the .NET assembly question in the skills assessment because I didn't remember that there was a section on .exe files with .NET assemblies. It's called 'Developing Yara Rules', and illustrates how we can answer this question. 
Essentially, you load the document from monodis (use command line) or into dnSpy and follow along with the screenshot that is provided within the explanation of .NET assemblies. 
 
This is a screenshot of the dnSpy utility within a windows environment. Monodis is used within Linux distributions...I think, as I got errors trying to use it in Powershell. 

dnSpy [GitHub - dnSpy/dnSpy: .NET debugger and assembly editor](https://github.com/dnSpy/dnSpy)
monodis [Dis/Assembling CIL Code | Mono (mono-project.com)](https://www.mono-project.com/docs/tools+libraries/tools/monodis/) Command monodis --output+code <filename.exe>

[back](./TidBits-Main.html)
